The false self was created in denial of
this original loss, this core
narcissistic wound, but it quickly
becomes its own prison. The person grows
up to seek validation and admiration,
which are experiences that reinforce
grandiosity and collude with the
individual's denial of the wounds that
lie underneath. However, on some level,
the person knows that the validation
isn't genuine. It's praise for the false
self and they're aware deep down of
profound deficits and dependencies
inside themselves. Feelings that they
may be terrified to let anyone else see.
The person feels compelled to keep it
hidden beneath a grandiose facade. With
the result being that the love they
receive in adulthood often feels just as
conditional as the quote love they
received as children. Miller writes, "It
is thus impossible for the grandiose
person to cut the tragic link between
admiration and love. In his compulsion,
he seeks insatiably for admiration of
which he never gets enough because
admiration is not the same thing as
love." End quote. Unconsciously, the
person may desperately want someone to
see through these defenses to truly
understand the pain underneath. But most
people are fooled by the false self. And
those who do see through these defenses
are often rejected before they have a
chance to expose the underlying shame.
So anger and resentment build. There's
often contempt toward people who are so
easily fooled by this facade. And this
contempt reflects the depth of unmet
emotional need that lies underneath.
the individual can't face the
unspeakable loss that motivates their
pain and necessitates these defenses.
And so they end up sort of rediscovering
the same feelings of rejection and
conditional love over and over again as
they move through life, unaware that the
very thing that allowed them to survive
childhood is now costing them real
intimacy and meaningful connection.